Mike Demopoulos: Hello and
welcome to the 2 o'clock hour
UTC of WP
Accessibility Day 2020.
I'm your host, Mike Demo,
and I am so excited
about today: the
next presentation.
But before we get to that, a
little bit of housekeeping.
First of all, remember that
we are a welcoming community,
and the code of conduct is
enforced in all areas of the
experience, including the chat.
And that chat's important
because that's where you put the
questions, and our wonderful
moderators will click them for
me to ask after
the presentation.
Please make sure to follow us
on Twitter @WPAccessibility,
and our two hashtags are
#wpaccessibilityday
and #wpad2020.
It is--up next, we have
Christina Workman.
Christina Workman is a
support technician at
WebDevStudios and Maintainn.
As an advocate for
contributing to WordPress,
she recently launched the
wp_contribute() podcast and
helps organize WordCamp US,
WordCamp Calgary, and the
Calgary WordPress Meetup.
She has a passion for teaching
kids STEM and improving
her accessibility skills.
Outside of WordPress,
Christina is a purple-o-phile,
tea fanatic, and lover of
British detective shows.
So, with that, it is my pleasure
to welcome my friend Christina.
Christina Workman: Hi, Mike.
Thanks.
All right, let me
just get the slides.
All right.
Hi, everyone.
Thanks for joining me for
our accessibility--sorry.
Accessible Websites
Benefit Everyone.
First, a little bit about me:
I know Mike already sort of
touched on a lot
of these points.
But I do have a podcast
called wp_contribute(),
where I interview people
who contribute
to the WordPress Project.
I've been a Meetup and WordCamp
organizer for several years.
And a good chunk of everything
that I have learned about
WordPress, I have learned
at these kinds of events.
I've been using WordPress
for about ten years now,
first as a freelancer and then,
as Mike said, a support
technician at the Maintainn
Division for WebDevStudios.
I love tea and have at least
a hundred different kinds
of tea in my kitchen.
And as Mike said,
I'm a purple-o-phile.
I am obsessed with
all things purple,
as you can probably tell
from my slides and my shirt,
and, you know, if you
see my headphones.
So yeah.
I'm still a little bit of
an accessibility newbie;
maybe about two years ago, I
started to learn about and
consider accessibility
for websites.
But even in that short time,
I've noticed that a lot of
people still have a lot of
apprehension about making sure
their sites are accessible.
My goal with this talk is
to help you recognize that
implementing best practices to
make your website accessible
will ensure a better
user experience
for all of your site visitors.
I'll be discussing
various examples.
They are by no means exhaustive,
and I hope that you will start
thinking of your own examples
as we go through these
and once everything is done.
So there are lots of reasons
that people give about why they
won't make their
sites accessible,
and I'm sure lots of you
have a lot of these already.
So, the first one, of
course, it costs too much.
And there are a ton of
counter-arguments to this.
But essentially, the sooner
you start recognizing and
considering accessibility,
the less it's going to cost.
Another one is, it
will wreck my design.
It might change your design,
but of course, you can still
make beautiful, creative,
and accessible websites.
And the third one,
my site visitors
don't have disabilities.
This is a giant fallacy which
often goes hand-in-hand with the
misconception that accessibility
is purely for the sake of people
with disabilities, and for
some, maybe to avoid lawsuits,
which is not the right
reason to be doing it.
Not only do I guarantee, though,
that your site has visitors who
have disabilities, I also know
that an accessible website can
have a positive impact on
anyone who visits that site.
We need to start understanding
that an accessible website is
one that can easily
be used by everyone.
So you might be thinking, how
can I be so sure that your site
has visitors with disabilities?
The answer is simple.
We have all experienced
disability, some form
of disability in our lives,
and we will again.
Often, the image of a person
with a disability is somebody
who is blind or deaf or has
lost the use of a limb.
These are considered
permanent disabilities,
but there are also temporary
and situational disabilities.
So to put these into context,
if you have an amputated arm,
that, of course, would be
a permanent disability.
But a broken arm, which
would be a temporary disability,
can have the same
impact on how you function.
And an armful of groceries also
prevents you from using that arm
for other purposes for a
very short period of time.
That's situational.
And there are lots of
accessibility considerations
that make life easier for people
who aren't experiencing
any form of disability.
So let's get to some examples.
And as I said, these are
by no means exhaustive.
There are a million
different examples,
and we're not going to touch
on every type of disability,
but I hope these get
you to start thinking.
So, first scenario.
You get home from work and
you have to feed your kids.
You have a migraine.
The kids are excited and
loud, which adds to the
brain fog from your migraine.
You decide to order
delivery from a website.
So let's discuss some of the
potential barriers that could
make this a difficult experience
for you in this scenario.
Confusing navigation.
Hard-to-find buttons and links.
These need to be clear where
you're going to click in order
to get to the ordering portal,
to add items to your cart, to
pay for your order, all of
these kinds of things.
Otherwise, you'll end up
getting confused and frustrated.
Too many calls to action
fighting for your attention when
you can barely think because of
the migraine and brain fog
that you have going on.
These are distractions that
are too hard to cope with.
So again, confusion can ensue.
Fast-moving animations
similar to too many CTAs,
but also, these can make your
headache worse and make it hard
for you to even
look at the screen.
And finally, some
checkout form issues.
Input field labels used as
placeholder text that disappear
when you start
typing in that field.
I've been caught by these when
I'm not giving my site my full
attention, even
without a headache.
Imagine in our scenario,
you click into a field,
you hear a crash in the
living room that distracts you,
and when you return back to that
form and return your attention
there, you have no recollection
of what that input field was for
and what you are
supposed to enter there.
And something I see less often
but certainly has happened,
the inability to click into a
field can baffle and frustrate
and make you think
that it's impossible
to complete this order.
All of these factors could
result in you giving up on
placing an order on
the site and taking
your business elsewhere.
Not to mention adding to just
the general frustration and
chaos that's
happening around you.
Migraines fall under the
neurological category,
which would include
other things such as ADHD,
autism, and epilepsy as
permanent disabilities.
So who else can benefit from
neurological considerations?
I'm sure you can all
relate to at least
one of these situations.
Brain fog, which can happen on
its own or can be a result of a
lack of sleep or a flu or cold;
mental health concerns like
anxiety, depression,
even general stress
can impact your ability to focus
and process what you see on a
site as well as simply being
in a distracting environment.
Neurological accessibility
benefits everyone.
So, our next scenario.
You decide to remote work
from a local coffee shop.
I used to do this all the time.
You get stuck on a problem
and search for a tutorial.
You find the perfect video
embedded on its own webpage,
but darn it, you forgot
your headphones at home.
So what are some
potential complications here?
First, if there are no
closed captions or subtitling
available, you can't watch it on
mute and know what's being said.
If video is the only way the
information was presented,
there's no transcript or
blog post that sums up that
information, both of these
results in you being unable to
get the information that
you need when you need it.
The last item isn't necessarily
a barrier but definitely has
the potential to cause
issues and embarrassment.
The video is set to autoplay,
and as soon as the page loads,
the audio is streaming out of
your laptop for all to hear.
Personally, I've actually been
startled by autoplaying videos
before, even on sites
I repeatedly visit.
These issues are all audio
related and certainly affect
people who have some form
of permanent hearing loss.
But there are a variety of other
people who can benefit from text
alternatives to audio, people
with temporary hearing loss due
to tinnitus or a plugged ear
that could be caused from an ear
infection or allergies or even
if you've been traveling
and just got off a plane.
I often prefer to skim through
text to find a quick answer
rather than watching a video.
And some people simply process
information better by reading it
rather than listening to it.
People learning a new language
may use subtitles to follow
along and help them learn and
understand the language better.
And of course, in this age, we
have digital assistants like
Siri, Google Assistant, Alexa,
and they can all read text
from websites if it's there.
And, of course, loud
environments in general can
make it very hard to understand
what is being said in audio.
Audio accessibility
benefits everyone.
So, our third scenario.
You're a WordPress
developer who never takes
their hands off the keyboard.
You know all the
keyboard shortcuts,
and there's not a mouse to be
found anywhere in your office.
You decide to register in an
online course with the latest
and greatest headless platform.
So let's look at some of
the barriers you might
experience with this scenario.
No "Skip to Content" option,
which means you have to tab
through every single item in
the header before getting to
the main part of the page.
Add to that a main
navigation that forces you
to tap through every sub item.
And you may feel like it's never
going to get off of the header.
No focus indication
means you can't see
where you are on that page,
what link or button
you might click if
you hit enter.
Then we've got unexpected
tab behavior, which can take you
all over the page in
some random experiences.
And I've seen where it goes
straight from the "Skip to
Content" right down to the
bottom to the chat box that they
have, then back up to the
top, and then into the middle,
and that's just so confusing
when you're trying to follow
the flow of the page.
And then, by the time you
finally read the information
about the course and
decide to register,
you may encounter keyboard traps
like not being able to return to
a field once it's filled out
or not being able to leave the
registration form
unless you hit submit.
These are frustrations
that people with physical
disabilities, who need to use
keyboards or other special
devices to navigate
websites, face all the time.
So here's some other examples of
when you might need or want to
rely solely on your keyboard.
You may have a broken arm, a
broken wrist, a broken finger.
Anything on that limb that
is just not functioning
or even if it does function.
I've had my
finger broken before,
and you get that splint on it.
And try using a mouse with
a splint on your finger.
It just doesn't work.
Maybe you have carpal tunnel
syndrome or something else that
flares up every now,
but not all the time.
Maybe you have a wireless
mouse, and the battery died
and you don't have any
extra batteries in the house.
Or my personal favorite,
you have a sleeping baby
or pet on your lap.
My dog loves to sit on my lap
and rest his head on my dominant
arm, and I hate to disturb
him, so I don't move my arm.
I just put it in position on the
keyboard and try to type as best
I can and use my
other hand as well.
So keyboard
accessibility benefits everyone.
Our last scenario.
You live in Oregon on the
West Coast in the United States,
and its three weeks ago.
Temperatures are high and you
don't have an air conditioner,
so windows need to be open.
Wildfires break out all around
you, causing poor air quality
that irritates your eyes
and blurs your vision.
You have to evacuate to a more
rural area that has poor wi-fi,
and you're going to work
remotely while you're there,
and you need to visit a variety
of websites throughout the day.
So let's look at
our barriers here.
When you have blurry eyes,
trying to read small or skinny
font text is really difficult.
Low contrast between the
foreground and the background
can make it hard to see
information when you're trying
to get your eyes to
focus and they won't.
Linked text can be hard to
notice if it's only using color
to differentiate
from regular text
and if the colors
are too similar.
Maybe you want to zoom in to
make it easier to read the
content, but the layout
isn't suited to resizing.
So images and maybe even text
go off the side of the screen,
and you can't access it.
And if images don't load because
of the weak wi-fi and there is
no alternative text, you
could be missing
out on important information.
These all fall into the
visual category, affecting
people who have colorblindness
or reduced vision.
And again, we have lots of
scenarios that can affect your
ability to see a website.
You may have an eye injury,
maybe you had eye surgery
or an eye infection.
I heard this mentioned
in another talk earlier,
you know, there's a typo on this
slide, but the dilated eyes
from having an eye exam when you
get those drops in your eyes.
Another form of migraine is an
oral migraine which can cause
part or all of your
vision to be obscured.
Bright sun, either shining
directly on your eyes or on your
screen, can make it hard
to see when the
contrast isn't very different.
Allergies similar to the smoke
irritant in our scenario can
cause your eyes to blur or
maybe something as simple as you
forgot your reading glasses.
Visual accessibility
benefits everyone.
All of these scenarios are
real-life examples, many that
I have personally experienced
or know somebody who has.
Maybe you can relate
to one or two of them.
Maybe you can
relate to a lot of them.
Either way, I challenge you to
come up with your own examples
that you can share with others
that will help accessibility
considerations
become more commonplace.
And at the very least, I hope I
have convinced you that making
your website accessible
makes it better for everyone.
Thank you for listening.
You can find me on
Twitter, send me an email,
and of course,
gratuitous plug for my podcast,
wp_contribute() on all
of the podcast players.
Mike: Well, that
was a great talk.
Thank you so much for
taking the time to share that.
We are waiting for some
questions to come in,
so if you have any questions,
please put them into the YouTube
channel and then they'll be
brought over to the webpage
at wpaccessibilityday.org.
And you can actually
find Christina's slides
at our website as well.
But as we're waiting for those
questions to come in, and we do
have one, I had a--
something that reminded me from
your talk is I was listening
to someone from Interactive
Accessibility, and they said
something that when designers
are put in a box, they
become more creative.
And I think that's very true.
And again, this was a while ago
before accessibility was common,
but your point of, yes, you
can still design pretty things,
you can still make
interactive applications,
but it doesn't mean that
you're being restricted
because of accessibility.
Christina: Exactly, and
that--I mean, I've learned
something like that too, that
sometimes we need the box
to be more creative, right?
The more you know about
the box that you're in,
the more creative you can get.
So absolutely, it helps.
Mike: Cool, well,
going to do some questions.
Our first question
is, "For businesses,
what is the easiest fix or win
for making an e-commerce
site more accessible?"
Christina: And
that's a good question.
I mean, ultimately, it
depends on how accessible
your site already is.
But one of the biggest things
that I think a lot of people
miss out on when
considering accessibility,
sort of just trying to do
these quick and easy fixes,
is focusing on those contact
forms, making sure that you can
back tab in them, that you can
get into them with the mouse
or with the keyboard or with
the screen reader or however
somebody might need to access
your form, making sure that
they can get into it, they can
move around in it, they
know always what the fields are
that they're typing into, and
that it's easy for
them to submit.
Mike: Okay, our next
question is, "Do you have
suggestions for tools people
can use to stop or
block annoying autoplaying
sound and video?"
Christina: Oh,
that's an awesome question.
I do not, but now, I didn't even
think to look for something like
that because
literally, I wasn't joking.
I update sites every
week as part of my job,
and there's one site that
has a video that autoplays,
and it's quite down
on the screen too.
And every single
week, it scares me.
Every single week.
So I am going to look into that
and see if I can find something
that I'm going to use, and
then I'll update the answer
on the website when I do.
Mike: Excellent; so on a
similar vein, 'cause, you know,
some people are, you
know, we're on a WordPress,
you know,
Accessibility Day, so obviously,
we're making our
WordPress sites accessible,
but not everybody
uses the WordPress CMS.
Do you think any of
the out-of-the-box,
like turnkey solutions that do
work with WordPress but also
things like
Shopify or Wix or Weebly,
like AudioEye or any
of those, you know,
application SAS
accessibility services,
have any value, or do you think
it should--the site should just
be natively accessible from the
beginning of the design process?
Christina: I mean, I do
believe the more natively
accessible it is, the better.
Starting with that foundation,
you know, when--again, people
talk about how much it costs to
make a site accessible, it's
actually one of those
retrofitting issues, right?
It's more costly to retrofit
accessibility into your existing
site than to build it from the
beginning with accessibility.
And when you--lots of
those things regarding
accessibility don't even have
anything to do with the platform
you're on, you know,
things like the contrasts
of the colors that you use.
Those are design
choices that need
to be made from the beginning.
So anything and everything
you can do to start from a good
place of accessibility
from the very beginning
is the best way to go.
Mike: Okay, excellent.
So I'm not seeing
any other questions,
so I think we are
going to wrap it up.
Again, thank you
so much, Christina,
for taking the time and
sharing your expertise with us.
And your slides can be found
at wpaccessibilityday.org,
and you're also
on Twitter, right?
Christina: I am on Twitter, yes.
Mike: Okay, and
what's your username?
Christina: Twitter
username is amethystanswers.
I will spell that because
very few people know
how to spell amethyst.
So that is
A-M-E-T-H-Y-S-T A-N-S-W-E-R-S.
Mike: Excellent; and while
you're on Twitter, please
follow us @WPAccessibility, and
our two hashtags are
#wpaccessibilityday
and #wpad2020.
Thank you so much for watching.
Thank you to all of
our wonderful sponsors.
And please stay tuned because
even though I'm out of here as
your host, at the top
of the hour at 3 a.m. UTC,
we have Alicia, whose topic
is "Adventures in Accessibility:
How Embracing Accessibility
Made Me a Better Storyteller."
I know I'm excited for that.
I just attended the
STORY Gatherings
conference two weeks ago.
So everyone, go get a
light meal or a snack,
and we'll see you
in a half hour, bye.